picture a monster that can attack at any
time that can change itself to evade the
weapons used against it and can come
back to life from the dead it sounds
like something from a horror movie but
this monster is real its killed Steve
Jobs Patrick Swayze and when I was 14 my
mother now my slide gives away the
mystery but the monster is cancer and
just like the different image of a
monster you all have in your minds
cancer is always different even in one
person over the course of their
treatment because you see when we treat
cancer with a drug there's the potential
for it to mutate and become resistant
well how does it do this cancer actually
has a variety of mechanisms it can use
to survive and so when we inhibit one
with a drug there is the potential for
it to become dependent on a secondary
mechanism and continue to ravage a great
example of this was a clinical trial
looking at the effect of
anti-angiogenesis drugs these are drugs
that stop the mechanism of cancer that
allow it to grow new blood vessels
towards itself to bring fresh oxygen and
nutrients researchers thought that if
they could cut this off they would be
able to starve the blood and starve the
cancer and it would die but the problem
was patients died in the same amount of
time and instead of one large tumor they
had multiple small aggressive tumors all
over their body so if these these
combinations of mechanisms exist how do
we find a way to treat them together
well this is called combination therapy
giving multiple drugs at the same time
and trying to predict that secondary
mechanism and it is a great idea in
theory because 160 different approved
hemotherapy drugs finding the right
combinations is not only challenging
expensive but also dangerous because
multiple drugs can mean multiple
interactions so how do we find them well
we compute them I have created a
computer simulation of cancer growth
where we can watch cancer grow from one
cell all the way to a fully detectable
tumor in a matter of hours we can add
treatment and mutations anywhere along
the way
and I have studied a hundred and twenty
different combination treatments to see
if they really are more effective
together I have found some that
effectively silenced the cancer and five
specific ones that make cancer worse
the key here we astound this without
risking patients lives costing millions
or taking the twelve years the average
clinical trial takes in the future we
hope we can use things like this to
narrow the field of the treatments that
we have to test but more importantly to
predict the killer combo for each
individual patient and finally slay the
monster thank you